rework php zero-code page (#4952)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/docs/zero-code/php.md

cSpell:ignore: centos configurator democlass epel myapp pecl phar remi unindented userland
---

## Requirements

Automatic instrumentation with PHP requires:

> - PHP 8.0 or later

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- PHP 8.0 or higher
```

> - the
>   [OpenTelemetry PHP extension](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-php-instrumentation)
> - [composer autoloading](https://getcomposer.org/doc/01-basic-usage.md#autoloading)
> - the [OpenTelemetry SDK](https://packagist.org/packages/open-telemetry/sdk)
> - one or more
>   [instrumentation libraries](/ecosystem/registry/?component=instrumentation&language=php)
> - [configuration](#configuration)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [OpenTelemetry PHP extension](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-php-instrumentation)
- [Composer autoloading](https://getcomposer.org/doc/01-basic-usage.md#autoloading)
- [OpenTelemetry SDK](https://packagist.org/packages/open-telemetry/sdk)
- One or more
  [instrumentation libraries](/ecosystem/registry/?component=instrumentation&language=php)
- [Configuration](#configuration)
```

{{% alert title="Important" color="warning" %}}Installing the OpenTelemetry

> extension by itself will not generate traces. {{% /alert %}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
extension by itself does not generate traces. {{% /alert %}}
```

   php -m | grep opentelemetry
   ```

## Install SDK and instrumentation libraries

> Now that the extension is installed, you should install the OpenTelemetry SDK
> and one or more instrumentation libraries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that the extension is installed, install the OpenTelemetry SDK
and one or more instrumentation libraries.
```

> Automatic Instrumentation is available for a number commonly used PHP libraries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Automatic instrumentation is available for a number commonly used PHP libraries.
```

For the full list, see
[instrumentation libraries on packagist](https://packagist.org/search/?query=open-telemetry&tags=instrumentation).

Let's assume that your application uses Slim Framework and a PSR-18 HTTP client.
You would then install the SDK and corresponding auto-instrumentation packages
for these:

```shell
composer require \
    open-telemetry/sdk \
    open-telemetry/opentelemetry-auto-slim \
    open-telemetry/opentelemetry-auto-psr18
```

## Configuration

When used in conjunction with the OpenTelemetry SDK, you can use environment

> variables or `php.ini` to configure auto-instrumentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
variables or the `php.ini` file to configure auto-instrumentation.
```

> ### Via environment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Environment configuration
```

php myapp.php
```

> ### Via php.ini

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### php.ini configuration
```

Append the following to `php.ini`, or another `ini` file that will be processed
by PHP:

```ini
OTEL_PHP_AUTOLOAD_ENABLED=true
OTEL_SERVICE_NAME=your-service-name
OTEL_TRACES_EXPORTER=otlp
OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_PROTOCOL=grpc
OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT=http://collector:4317
OTEL_PROPAGATORS=baggage,tracecontext
```

## Run your application

> Once all of the above is installed and configured, you can start your
> application as you normally would.
> 
> The traces you see exported to the OpenTelemetry Collector will depend on the
> instrumentation libraries you have installed, and the code path that was taken
> inside the application. In the example above, using Slim Framework and PSR-18
> instrumentation libraries, you should expect to see spans such as:
> 
> - a root span representing the HTTP transaction
> - a span for the action that was executed
> - a span for each HTTP transaction that the PSR-18 client sent
> 
> It's also worth noting that the PSR-18 client instrumentation will append
> [distributed tracing](/docs/concepts/context-propagation/#propagation) headers
> to outgoing HTTP requests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After all of the above is installed and configured, start your
application as you normally would.

The traces you see exported to the OpenTelemetry Collector depend on the
instrumentation libraries you have installed, and the code path that was taken
inside the application. In the previous example, using Slim Framework and
PSR-18 instrumentation libraries, you should expect to see spans such as:

- A root span representing the HTTP transaction
- A span for the action that was executed
- A span for each HTTP transaction that the PSR-18 client sent

Note that the PSR-18 client instrumentation appends
[distributed tracing](/docs/concepts/context-propagation/#propagation) headers
to outgoing HTTP requests.
```

## How it works

{{% alert title="Optional" color="info" %}} You can skip over this section if
you just want to get up and running quickly, and there are suitable
instrumentation libraries for your application. {{% /alert %}}

> The extension enables registering observer functions (as PHP code) against
> classes and methods, and executing those functions before and after the observed
> method runs.
> 
> If there is not an instrumentation library for your framework or application,
> you can write your own. The following example provides some code which we wish
> to auto-instrument, and then illustrates how to use the OpenTelemetry extension
> to trace the execution of that code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The extension enables registering observer functions as PHP code against
classes and methods, and executing those functions before and after the observed
method runs.

If there is not an instrumentation library for your framework or application,
you can write your own. The following example provides some code to be
instrumented, and then illustrates how to use the OpenTelemetry extension
to trace the execution of that code.
```

require 'vendor/autoload.php';

/* The class to be instrumented */
class DemoClass
{
    public function run(): void
    {
        echo 'Hello, world';
    }
}

/* The auto-instrumentation code */
OpenTelemetry\Instrumentation\hook(
    class: DemoClass::class,
    function: 'run',
    pre: static function (DemoClass $demo, array $params, string $class, string $function, ?string $filename, ?int $lineno) {
        static $instrumentation;
        $instrumentation ??= new CachedInstrumentation('example');
        $span = $instrumentation->tracer()->spanBuilder('democlass-run')->startSpan();
        Context::storage()->attach($span->storeInContext(Context::getCurrent()));
    },
    post: static function (DemoClass $demo, array $params, $returnValue, ?Throwable $exception) {
        $scope = Context::storage()->scope();
        $scope->detach();
        $span = Span::fromContext($scope->context());
        if ($exception) {
            $span->recordException($exception);
            $span->setStatus(StatusCode::STATUS_ERROR);
        }
        $span->end();
    }
);

/* Run the instrumented code, which will generate a trace */
$demo = new DemoClass();
$demo->run();
```

> In the example above we define `DemoClass`, then register `pre` and `post` hook
> functions on its `run` method. The hook functions will run before and after each
> execution of the `DemoClass::run()` method. The `pre` function starts and
> activates a span, and the `post` function ends it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The previous example defines `DemoClass`, then registers `pre` and `post`
hook functions on its `run` method. The hook functions run before and after
each execution of the `DemoClass::run()` method. The `pre` function starts
and activates a span, while the `post` function ends it.
```

> If an exception was thrown by `DemoClass::run()`, the `post` function will
> record it, without affecting exception propagation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If `DemoClass::run()` throws an exception, the `post` function
records it without affecting exception propagation.
```
